What is Generative Art?
Complexity Theory as a Context for Art Theory

Abstract
In this paper an attempt is made to offer a definition of generative art that is inclusive
and provides fertile ground for both technical and art theoretical development. First
the use of systems is identified as a key element in generative art. Various ideas from
complexity theory are then introduced. It is noted that systems exist on a continuum
from the highly ordered to the highly disordered. Citing examples from information
theory and complexity science, it is noted that highly ordered and highly disordered
systems are typically viewed as simple, and complex systems exhibit both order and
disorder. This leads to the adoption of effective complexity, order, and disorder as
organizing principles in the comparison of various generative art systems. This
inclusive view leads to the somewhat surprising observation that generative art is as
old as art itself. A number of specific artists and studies are discussed within this
systems and complexity theory influenced paradigm. Finally a number of art
theoretical questions are introduced to exercise the suggested generative art definition
and implicit paradigm.

1. Introduction
I teach a course titled "Foundations of Generative Art Systems" [1] and the most
frequent question I am asked is "what is generative art?" Generative art often seems
like a fuzzy notion, and most students don't seem to "get it" until very late in the
semester.
And indeed, in forums such as the eu-gene mailing list
(http://www.generative.net) this very question has sparked considerable controversy.
In opening this paper I would like to gratefully acknowledge the many discussions on
this topic I've had with both my students and the eu-gene online community.
Some might wonder whether the attempt to define generative art is an empty pedantic
exercise. I hope that this paper will show that it is not. First clarity of language
enhances any discussion, including those about art and specifically generative art.
Additionally the discussion of what generative art is stimulates the discussion of other
art critical concerns.

2. Two Views of the Term “Generative Art”
First a quick look at the term “generative art” from the bottom up, and from the top
down.
2.1 From the Bottom Up – Clusters of Current Generative Art Activity
With regard to the "what is generative art?" question one is often reminded of the
parable of the blind men and the elephant. One blind man feeling the leg of the
elephant says, "Surely an elephant is like a mighty tree". Another blind man, holding
the trunk of the elephant says, "Surely an elephant is like a large snake". Yet another
blind man, placing his hands on the sides of the elephant, exclaims, "Surely an
elephant is like a great whale". And so on. In a similar way artists seems to all too
often define generative art as being most like the work that is closest at hand, namely
their own generative art.
And indeed there are clusters of contemporary generative art activity that are, in many
ways, worlds onto themselves. Some of these include:
Electronic Music and Algorithmic Composition - Dating at least to the seminal paper
by Brooks, Hopkins, Neumann, and Wright in 1957 [2], those in the electronic music
community have explored all manner of generative processes for the creation (at the
macro level) of musical scores and (at the micro level) the subtle modulation of
performance and timbre. This activity has not been limited to academic music. A
recent article in Electronic Musician, a magazine for working musicians, notes more
than a dozen programs using techniques as varied as cellular automata, fractals, a-life,
L-systems, chaos, and of course randomization. [3]
Computer Graphics and Animation - Well documented in the vast body of literature
published by the ACM SigGraph organization and others, computer graphics
researchers have contributed to the realm of generative art for decades now.
Examples of generative breakthroughs would include Perlin Noise [4] for the
synthesis of smoke, fire, and hair imagery, the use of L-systems to grow enough
virtual plant life to populate entire forests and valleys [5], and the use of physical
modeling to create animations that depict real world behavior without requiring the
animator to painstakingly choreograph every detail. These efforts have yielded
results that reach far beyond the research community. Examples include animated
feature length films such as those by Pixar and the hugely popular realm of video
game machines.
The Demo Scene and VJ Culture - Borrowing from the above, youth culture
movements are taking generative technology out of the well funded labs, recording
studios, and animation companies, and adapting low cost alternatives for use in
nightclubs and other social settings. For such artists and enthusiasts generative art is
no longer obscure or esoteric, but rather an everyday method of creation.
Randomization is the most frequently discussed technique, but others are working
their way into the scene as well.

Industrial Design and Architecture - Design practice has always included the
iterative process of creating numbers of samples, selecting among them, making
incremental improvements and hybrid samples, again evaluating the results, and so
on. This manual practice is quite reminiscent of the evolutionary process of genetic
variation and natural selection.
It was seemingly inevitable that soon after the adoption of the computer by designers
as a manual tool for CAD, there would follow the adoption of genetically inspired
algorithms for the creation and selection of variations. In fact the generative artist
William Latham initially used an evolutionary system that existed purely on paper,
and only later did he move to computerized versions. [6]
Clearly any attempt to define generative art would have to include all of the above, as
there is no obvious reason to privilege one form of contemporary generative art
practice over another. And few would want to stop with just the above. One could
also include, for example, robot art and math art as clusters of generative art activity.
The fine arts offer a number of challenges in this regard. For example, in the 20th
century a number of artists such as John Cage, William Burroughs, and Marcel
Duchamp embraced randomization as a fecund generative principle. Minimalists
such as Carl Andre, Mel Bochner, and Paul Morgenson used simple mathematical
principles to generate compositions. The conceptual artist Sol Lewitt uses
combinatorial systems to create complex works from simple components, and
conceptual artist Hans Haacke explored physical generative systems in his early work.
And indeed some have wondered whether a painter like Kenneth Noland should be
considered a generative artist given his “systemic art” practice, or whether Jackson
Pollock's drip and splash method qualifies as the kind of randomization that would
place his work in the realm of generative art. I, in fact, don't consider Noland and
Pollock to be generative artists. But given the dizzying variety generative art offers it
is an entirely legitimate question to ask
2.1 From the Top Down – Generative Art Considered Literally
The term generative art can also be explored from the top down by considering its
literal abstract meaning.
I often joke with my students that it is easy to tell if something is generative art. First
it must be art, and second it must be generative. The joke here is, of course, I am
begging the question. One difficult question is replaced by two difficult questions.
What do we mean by art, and what do we mean by generative?
The "what is art?" question is often brought up to mock and sound a cautionary note
about the perils of intellectual discourse rather than to pose a serious question. But
this is mostly unfair. The discussion spawned by the question "what is art?" can in
fact be productive and useful. It has perhaps been best considered by specialists in
aesthetics in the analytic school of philosophy found primarily in the U.S. and U.K.
A recounting of this debate is beyond the scope of this paper but is well-summarized
elsewhere, for example Carrol’s book “Philosophy of Art”. [7]

Viable contemporary definitions of art generally include a notion akin to fuzzy set
theory so that some things may be considered more fully art than others. In a similar
way we can expect that some works are more fully generative art than others. In
addition current notions about art recognize it as a social and historical notion that
changes over time. To the extent generative art is art surely this must apply there as
well. But I hope to show that the generative aspect can be fixed in a more stable way.
The word "generative" simply directs attention to a subset of art, a subset where
potentially multiple results can be produced by using some kind of generating system.
It is important to note here that if generative art also included art produced by any
kind of generating idea, then generative art would include all art, and it would loose
its utility as a distinct term.

3. Generative Art Defined
So a useful definition of generative art should (1) include known clusters of past and
current generative art activity, (2) allow for yet to be discovered forms of generative
art, (3) exist as a subset of all art while allowing that the definition of "art" can be
contested, and (4) be restrictive enough that not all art is generative art.
Whether considered from the top down or the bottom up, the defining aspect of
generative art seems to be the use of an autonomous system for art making. Here is
the definition I've been using in my class:
Generative art refers to any art practice where the artist uses a system, such
as a set of natural language rules, a computer program, a machine, or other
procedural invention, which is set into motion with some degree of autonomy
contributing to or resulting in a completed work of art.
The key element in generative art is then the system to which the artist cedes partial
or total subsequent control. And with this definition some related art theory questions
come quickly to mind. A hint as to how that conversation might go will be offered at
the end of this paper.
For now here are some observations about this definition. First, note that the term
generative art is simply a reference to how the art is made, and it makes no claims as
to why the art is made this way or what its content is. Second, generative art is
uncoupled from any particular technology. Generative art may or may not be “high
tech”. Third, a system that moves an art practice into the realm of generative art must
be well defined and self-contained enough to operate autonomously.
So if systems are in a sense the defining aspect of generative art, it is worth asking if
all systems alike, or if there is a useful way to sort them out and thus, by implication,
sort out various kinds of generative art. This is the topic of the next few sections.

4. Complexity Science as a Context for Understanding
Systems [27]
Over the last 20 years or so scientists have attempted to create a new understanding of
systems. Under the general rubric of "complexity science" and “complexity theory”
various systems, and various kinds of systems, have been studied, compared,
contrasted, and mathematically and computationally modeled. An abstract
understanding of systems is beginning to emerge, and given that systems are a
defining aspect of generative art, complexity science has much to offer the generative
artist. And indeed a great deal of the work presented at this very conference in past
years is, explicitly or implicitly, rooted in complexity science.
Science generally proceeds in a reductive manner, the thinking being that by breaking
down complicated phenomena into its figurative (or literal) atomic parts one gains
predictive and explanatory power. The problem with reductionism, however, is that it
is often difficult to put the pieces back together again.
This is especially true of complex systems. When scientists speak of complex
systems they don't mean systems that are complicated or perplexing in an informal
way. The phrase "complex system" has been adopted as a specific technical term.
Complex systems typically have a large number of small parts or components that
interact with similar nearby parts and components. These local interactions often lead
to the system organizing itself without any master control or external agent being "in
charge". Such systems are often referred to as being self-organizing. These selforganized systems are also dynamic systems under constant change, and short of
death or destruction, they do not settle info a final stable "equilibrium" state. To the
extent these systems react to changes in their environment so as to maintain their
integrity, they are known as complex adaptive systems.
In common language one is reminded of the saying that “the whole is greater than the
sum of its parts.” Local components will interact in “nonlinear” ways, meaning that
the interactions do more than merely add up…they exponentiate. Examples of
complex systems are familiar to everyone. The weather, for example, forms coherent
patterns such as thunderstorms, tornados, and hot and cold fronts, yet there is no
central mechanism or control that creates such patterns. Weather patterns “emerge”
all over and all at once. In the near term weather can be predicted with some
accuracy, but beyond more than a few days the weather becomes quite unpredictable.
The stock market is similarly a complex system with emergent properties. Billions of
shares and transactions are linked in a finite chain of cause and effect, and patterns
such as booms and busts emerge from the overall system. Yet no one factor
dominates or “plans” the market, and even with all of the relevant information
available to the public, the stock market generates surprising and unpredictable
behavior.
Additional examples of complex systems include the brain (as studied by biologists)
and the mind (as studied by psychologists), the predation and population cycles of
animals in an ecosystem, the competition of genes and resulting evolution of a given
species, and the rise and fall of cultures and empires. Each of these systems consists

of many components (such as cells, chromosomes, citizens, etc.) that interact with
other nearby components, and form a coherent pattern or entity without any central
control or plan as to how that should happen.
Thus complex systems often develop in ways that are dramatic, fecund, catastrophic,
or so unpredictable as to seem random. Complexity science is a relatively new, and
at times controversial, attempt to understand such systems by bridging a number of
traditionally distinct disciplines. The ambition is to understand the commonalities
systems exhibit across all scales and hierarchies.
Note that the study of complex systems also provides context and perspective for
understanding simple systems. And the notion of generative art offered here includes
both complex and simple systems.

5. Chaotic Systems and Random Systems
Generative artists often use randomization. Complexity scientists often speak of
chaos. In many cases a chaotic system may seem random because its behavior is so
unpredictable. But it is important to keep in mind that there is a difference.
Complex systems often include chaotic behavior, which is to say that the dynamics of
these systems are nonlinear and difficult to predict over time, even while the systems
themselves are deterministic machines following a strict sequence of cause and effect.
The nonlinearity of chaotic systems results in the amplification of small differences,
and this is what makes them increasingly difficult to predict over time. This is
usually referred to as sensitivity to initial conditions or "the butterfly effect", from the
notion that a butterfly flapping its wings in Hawaii can result in a tornado in Texas.
[8]
It is important to remember, especially within the context of generative art, that
chaotic systems are not random systems. Natural chaotic systems may be difficult to
predict but they will still exhibit structure that is different than purely random
systems.
For example, even though it is difficult to predict the specific weather 6 months from
now, we can be relatively sure it won't be 200 degrees outside, nor will we be getting
30 feet of rain on a single day, and so on. The weather exists within some minimum
and maximum limits, and those expectations are a sort of container for all possible
weather states. This is what scientists call the phase space, and it describes a sort of
consistent general shape the chaotic system eventually traces out even though it
remains unpredictable in precise detail.
What about day to day weather transitions? The best predictor of tomorrow’s weather
is today’s weather. Even in my hometown of Chicago, known for its crazy weather, a
cold day is usually followed by another cold day. And a hot day is typically followed
by a hot day. And so on. The transition from one weather state to another can be
thought of as a path within the state space. Those paths are continuous (no
instantaneous jumps are allowed) and exhibit this form of local auto-correlation. In

other words unlike purely random systems chaotic systems have a sense of history.
I find life to be more like a complex chaotic system and less like a simple random
one. There is uncertainty, but there is still a sense that cause and effect are at play. I
may not be able to make a specific prediction for a specific time, but I can know how
things tend to go. And I can often consider some things as impossibilities. There are
surprises, but not at every single turn because there are also correspondences.
In a related way, artificial chaotic systems seem more like nature, and more like real
life, than artificial random systems. There is likely a lesson there for generative
artists.

6. Notions of Order and Disorder in Information Theory
While we have an intuitive sense of what we mean when we refer to a system as
"simple" or "complex" developing a formal technical measure of complexity that
corresponds well to our intuitive sense is not easy.
An earlier related attempt to better understand communication systems was initiated
by Claude Shannon in the form of information theory. [9] For the purposes of
analyzing the capacity of a given communication channel, the core idea is that the
more "surprise" a given communication can exhibit the more information it contains.
For example, consider a channel that can only send the letter "A" at regular intervals.
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
Every transmission is the same and allows for no modulation of the signal. It is, in a
sense, a highly ordered signal to the extreme. But even more, if all a channel can carry
is the letter "A" there are no surprises, and thus no information can be transmitted.
A channel that allows the sending of English language words like so:
I LIK E GENERATIVE ART
contains variation from character to character, and thus allows information to flow. It
should be noted that information theory is not fundamentally about the transmission
of meaning, but rather the capacity to transmit symbols. The following nonsense
sentence sent via the same channel:
PAPER BIG WORK I CATS
is about the same amount of information even though it is meaningless.

Natural language contains redundancy, which is another way of saying that the text
has consistent patterns, such as statistical frequencies of letter combinations that can
potentially be compressed out. For example, since we can anticipate the structure of
the English language we might send the following compressed string with relative
success:
I

LIK GENART

In the limiting case a signal in a channel that sends random letters is at maximum
information. For example:
FO E V Q K M V K D YP Q XC I H R S N W
A truly random stream of characters is maximally disordered and has no underlying
structure. Thus there are no patterns and redundancy to take advantage of, and no
compression is possible.
While saying a highly ordered sting of repeating characters has low information
seems intuitively correct, saying a highly disordered string of random characters has
maximum information seems peculiar. In terms of our human ability to extract
meaning from a given experience we require a mix of surprise and redundancy, i.e. a
signal somewhere between extreme order and disorder.
In his 1958 book "Information Theory and Esthetic Perception" Abraham Moles
applies these notions, along with findings from the realm of perceptual psychology, to
analyze the arts. [10] In line with the above, he attempts to apply various statistical
measures to classify musical works on a spectrum from "banal" to "novel"
corresponding to the relative order versus disorder of the given information. And
indeed one can easily intuit that forms such as, for example, traditional folk music are
more ordered and banal than, say, free jazz which encourages more disorder and
novelty.
At the extremes, however, highly ordered music (e.g. playing the same note over and
over again) is of no greater intrinsic aesthetic interest than highly disordered music
(e.g. playing entirely random pitches and durations). In terms of the pure esthetics we
will quickly lose interest in both. (Such performances might, however, be perfectly
legitimate given an appropriate conceptual framework providing context and thus
meaning).
Working artists understand that an audience will quickly tire of both a highly ordered
and a highly disordered aesthetic experience because both lack any structural
complexity worthy of their continued attention. The intuition that structure and
complexity increase somewhere between the extremes of order and disorder leads us
to the consideration of "effective complexity".

7. Algorithmic Complexity and Effective Complexity
Complex systems stand in contrast to simple systems, and attempts have been made to
invent measures that quantify the relative complexity of given systems. One approach
is to consider the algorithmic complexity (AC) of a given system. Algorithmic
complexity is also called the algorithmic information content (AIC), and was
independently developed by Kolmogorov, Solomonoff, and Chaitin.
It is known that in principle any system can be mapped into a smallest possible
program running on a universal computing machine generating a growing string as
output over time. Some systems, such as fractals, require infinite time to generate
because they have infinite detail. But that is not to say that fractals have infinite
complexity. They are simple in the sense that they exhibit self-similar structure at
every scale. And, in fact, a fractal algorithm can be very compact indeed. [11]
One might hope that AC or AIC is a good candidate for a measure of what we
intuitively consider complexity. Perhaps the larger the algorithmic complexity the
more complex the system.

Figure 7.1

Unfortunately, in the case of random processes we run into the same paradox as we
see in information theory.
For our low information example the AIC would be very small, and independent of
string length, because the algorithm could be very small. For example:
loop:

pr int " A"
go to loop

For our intermediate information, English language, example the AIC would be a bit
larger. The redundancy of natural language allows the use of an algorithm that carries
a compressed version of the string and then expands it. For example the algorithm:
pr int( expand( " NIFNEPOLDFIMDMEUMN" ) )

might result in the string:
HERE IS THE MESSAGE AFTER IT HAS BEEN UNCOMPRESSED
Unfortunately in the case of a system that generates a purely random result the AIC
will be quite a bit larger. Without redundant information in the string, in other words
without structure, no further lossless compression is possible. The smallest algorithm
would be a program that is a single "print" statement that includes the literal string in
question. Thus for a random string the AIC is at least as long as the length of the
string.
pr int(" APFUYWMVPBXTWLFMCRORNBHTEIYBCMIBUNEPMVU" )
Similar to what was previously shown, the AIC becomes larger the more random the
message is, and this conflicts with our intuitive sense of complexity. As Murray GellMann, one of the founders of the Sante Fe Institute and complexity science, puts it:
"This property of AIC, which leads to its being called, on occasion,
"algorithmic randomness,” reveals the unsuitability of the quantity as
a measure of complexity, since the works of Shakespeare have a
Lower AIC than random gibberish of the same length that would
typically be typed by the proverbial roomful of monkeys."
What is needed is a measure of "effective complexity" (EC) such that systems that are
highly ordered or disordered are given a low score, indicating simplicity, and systems
that are some where in between are given a high score, indicating complexity, GellMann goes on to say:
"A measure that corresponds much better to what is usually meant by
complexity in ordinary conversation, as well as in scientific discourse,
refers not to the length of the most concise description of an entity
(which is roughly what AIC is), but to the length of a concise
description of a set of the entity's regularities. Thus something
almost entirely random, with practically no regularities, would have
effective complexity near zero.
So would something completely
regular, such as a bit string consisting entirely of zeroes. Effective
complexity can be high only a region intermediate between total
order and complete disorder"

Figure 7.2

To measure EC Gell-Mann proposes to split a given system into two algorithmic
terms, with the first algorithm capturing structure and the second algorithm capturing
random deviation. The EC would then be proportional to the size of the optimally
compressed first algorithm that captures structure. There are objections to this
approach, for example some maintain that this notion of structure is subjective and
remains in the eye of the beholder. And indeed there are competing proposals as to
the specifics of effective complexity. [12]
The important point for the purpose of this paper is that complexity science has
produced a robust general paradigm for understanding and classifying systems.
Systems exist on a continuum from the highly ordered to the highly disordered. Both
highly ordered and highly disordered systems are simple. Complex systems exhibit a
mix of order and disorder.

8. Generative Art Systems in the Context of Complexity
Theory
Earlier I offered a definition of generative art where the key is the use of systems as
an indirect production method. This, taken in combination with the new paradigm for
systems suggested by complexity science, results in a paradigm for understanding and
sorting though generative art systems.
This paradigm for generative art systems is captured in the following figure, a
variation on the previous figures from Gary Flakes wonderful book "the
Computational Beauty of Nature". [13]

Figure 8.1

First one should note that complexity is specific to a given system, and the
classifications shown here are generalities. Not all genetically inspired evolutionary
systems are going to be equally complex. Some L-systems are going to be more
ordered than others, and some stochastic L-systems are going to be more disordered
than others. Also some L-systems are equivalent to fractals, while others using
parametric and contextual mechanisms are more complex (as shown). [5]
But if we accept this paradigm, that generative art is defined by the use of systems,
and that systems can be best understood in the context of complexity theory, we are
lead to an unusually broad and inclusive understanding of what generative art really
is.
And while it shouldn't be terribly surprising that the earliest forms of generative art
used simple systems, some will find it surprising and perhaps even controversial that
generative art is as old as art itself.
8.1 Highly Ordered Generative Art (and Generative Art as Old as Art
Itself)
In every time and place for which we can find artifacts, we find examples of the use
of symmetry in the creation of art. Reasonable people can disagree as to at what point
the use of symmetry can be considered an autonomous system. But even among the
most so called primitive peoples examples abound in terms of the use of geometric
patterns in textiles, symmetric designs about a point, repeating border designs, and so
on. Many of these are well documented in books by authors like Hargittai and
Hargittai [14] and Stevens. [15]
The artistic use of tiling, in particular, is nothing less than the application of abstract
systems to decorate specific surfaces. Leading the most notable examples in this
regard are perhaps the masterworks found in the Islamic world. It is no coincidence
the Islamic world also provided one of the significant cradles of mathematical

innovation. It is also worth noting that the word "algorithm" has its roots in the
Islamic world.
Highly ordered systems in generative art also made their appearance in innovative
20th century art. A popular contemporary tile artist, and student of the Islamic roots,
is M. C. Escher. While lacking in formal mathematical training, it is clear that he had
a significant understanding of the generative nature of what he called "the regular
division of the plane". Without the use of computers he invented and applied what
can only be called algorithms in the service of art. [16]
In addition, minimal and conceptual artists such as Carl Andre, Mel Bochner, Donald
Judd, Paul Mogenson, Robert Smithson, and Sol Lewitt used various simple highly
ordered geometric, number sequence, and combinatorial systems as generative
elements in their work. [17] [18]
In my class I frequently remind my students that you don't need a computer to create
generative art, and that in fact generative art existed long before computers. With
tongue only partially in cheek I also sometimes comment that generative art lead to
the invention of the computer!
A highlight in the history of generative art was the invention of the Jacquard loom.
Manual textile machines long allowed weavers to apply repetitive formulas in the
creation of patterned fabrics. With the industrial revolution some of these systems
were automated, but it was Jacquard's 1805 invention that introduced the notion of a
stored program in the form of punched cards that revolutionized the generative art of
weaving. Interestingly one of Jacquards primary goals was to allow the automation of
patterns of greater complexity. Later both Charles Babbage and Charles Hollerith
leveraged Jacquard's method of punch card programming in their efforts to invent the
computer.
But is generative art really as old as art? Many are familiar with the discoveries of
representational cave paintings some 35,000 years old that depict animals and early
mans daily life. But in 1999 and 2000 a team led by archaeologist Christopher
Henshilwood of the South African Museum in Cape Town uncovered the oldest
known art artifacts. Etched in hand sized pieces of red ochre more than 70,000 years
old is an unmistakable grid design made of triangular tiles that would be clearly
recognizable as such to Escher or generations of Islamic artists.
While the etchings, like all ancient archaeological finds, are not without controversy,
many find them compelling examples of abstract geometric thinking with an artistic
response. In a related article in Science anthropologist Stanley Ambrose of the
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign says "This is clearly an intentionally
incised abstract geometric design...It is art." [19]
Obviously two stone etchings alone cannot make the case that generative art is as old
as art itself. But around the world, and though out history, there is overwhelming
evidence of artists turning to systems of iterative symmetry and geometry to generate
form. Early generative art may seem unsophisticated because it is highly ordered and
simple, but our complexity inspired paradigm for generative art has an important

place for highly ordered simple systems
8.2 Highly Disordered Generative Art
The first use of randomization in the arts that I am aware of is an invention by
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. Mozart provides 176 measures of prepared music and a
grid that maps the throw of a pair of dice, and a sequence number (first throw, second
throw, etc) into the numbers 1 through 176. The player creates a composition by
making a sequence of random dice throws, and assembling the corresponding
measures in a sequential score. Perhaps Mozart knew intuitively that purely random
music isn’t terribly interesting because he found a primitive way to mix order and
disorder. The short pre-composed measures provide order, and the throw of the dice
provide disorder.
Randomization in the arts came into its own primarily in the 20th century. As a
young artist Elsworth Kelly used inexpensive materials such as children’s
construction paper along with chance methods to create colorful collages. He was
inspired to do this after observing the random patchworks that would develop in the
repair of cabana tents on the French Rivera. [20]
The writer William Burroughs famously used his Dada inspired “cut-up” technique to
randomize creative writing. Less well known are Burroughs experiments in visual art
using shotgun blasts to randomly scatter paint on, and partially destroy, plywood
supports. [21]
Occasionally Carl Andre would use a random spill technique rather than his more
typical highly ordered assembly system. [18]
Certainly one of the most famous advocates for the random selection of sounds in
music was John Cage.
In the era of computer-generated art the use of pseudo-random number generators
becomes perhaps the most popular digital generative technique.
As mentioned earlier, generative art is a long-standing art practice, but different artists
may choose the same generative technique for wholly different reasons. For John
Cage the motivation for randomization was a Zen inspired acceptance of all sounds as
being equally worthy. For Andre the intent was to somewhat similarly focus attention
on the materials, but also to assault art-world expectations regarding composition.
For many contemporary electronic musicians performing in a club context the use of
randomization isn’t so theory laden. It’s simply an attempt to add an element of
surprise to make things more interesting.
It is important to remember that what generative artists have in common is how they
make their work, but not why they make their work, or even why they choose to use
generative systems in their art practice. The big tent of generative art contains a
diversity of intent and opinion.

8.3 Complex Generative Art
One need only survey the proceedings of this very conference to see that the bulk of
those working on the cutting edge of generative art are working with systems that
combine order and disorder. These artists are exploring many of the same systems
that are the very meat of complexity science. Examples include genetic algorithms,
swarming behavior, parallel computational agents, neural networks, cellular automata,
L-systems, chaos, dynamical mechanics, fractals, a-life, reaction-diffusion systems,
emergent behavior, and all manner of complex adaptive systems. It would be difficult
to summarize all of this work in a single paper, and indeed there is no need to here.
The point I would like to emphasize here is that while complex systems dominate our
current attention, and in many ways represent the future of generative art, complex
systems are not “better than” simple systems. Each has a historical and contemporary
place in art practice. Both the ordered and the disordered, and the simple and the
complex, are needed to complete an account of systems, and to complete an account
of generative art.

9. Complexity Theory as a Context for Generative Art Theory
It is my hope that bolstered by the view of systems that complexity theory provides, a
fecund context for generative art theory will result from a broad and inclusive systems
oriented definition of generative art. Towards that end I will close by raising some
common questions I hear regarding generative art. While some initial answers are
provided here, my primary intent is to suggest that the paradigm suggested in this
paper is an inviting context further discussion.
9.1 Is generative art a subset of computer art?
Because contemporary generative art is so very often computer based many assume it
is a subset of computer art. I’ve tried to show here that generative art preceded
computer art, and in fact is as old as art itself. Equally important is the virtual
certainty that new forms of generative art will come after the computer as well.
Nanotechnology, genetic engineering, robotics, and other technologies will no doubt
offer generative artists some wonderful opportunities.
9.2 Isn’t generative art a subset of abstract art?
Generative art refers to a way to create art rather than an art style. Consider the work
of Harold Cohen who creates software that autonomously designs stylized
representational works depicting people in lush tropical settings. [22] And of course
there is the growing use of genetic and other generative systems in the design of
practical and decorative objects.

9.3 How can handmade art be generative?
A given work being generative is a matter of degree, i.e. generative art is a fuzzy set.
Generative art practice is really the key, and a given work might be created only
partially via the use of an autonomous system. In principle any computer based
generative method could be carried out by hand. More practically, if an artist creates
a system and then hands it off to an artisan for use in laying tiles, how different is that
from using a generative art robot? And how different is that from the artist choosing
to do it himself? What is key is that a system is applied with some degree of
autonomy, whether or not the construction happens by hand. Handmade generative
art is still quite different than other handmade art where the artist is making intuitive
design judgments from one moment to the next throughout the entire construction
process.
9.4 Why do artists choose to work using generative methods?
Generative art is a method of making art, but it carries with it no particular motivation
or ideology. In fact the use of generative methods may have nothing to do with the
content of the work at all. For example, filmmakers may use generative methods to
synthesize imagery for purely economic reasons. At the other extreme some
generative artists create works where there is no distance at all between the generative
production method and the meaning of the work. These are generative artists
exploring systems for their own sake. And of course there are numerous artists
somewhere in between. There are as many reasons to use generative methods as there
are generative artists. Perhaps more.
9.5 Is generative art an art movement?
Generative art as described here is simply systems oriented art practice, and it has
roots in the oldest known art. Various generative systems have been used by those in
assorted art movements over the years. Generative art as a systems oriented art
practice is much too large to be claimed by any single art movement.
There is, however, an earlier and somewhat obscure use of the same phrase in the
context of a specific art movement. Our discussion here should not be confused with
this narrow art historical technical homonym.
“Generative Art - A form of geometrical abstraction in which a basic element
is made to ‘ generate' other forms by rotation, etc. of the initial form in such a
way as to give rise to an intricate design as the new forms touch each other,
overlap, recede or advance with complicated variations. A lecture on
'Generative Art Forms' was given at the Queen's University, Belfast Festival
in 1972 by the Romanian sculptor Neagu, who also founded a Generative Art
Group. Generative art was also practiced among others by Eduardo McEntyre
and Miguel Ángel Vidal [1928- ] in the Argentine."[23]

This same source also defines “Systemic Art” which is at times confused with our
contemporary understanding of generative art.
"Systemic Art – a term originated by the critic Lawrence Alloway in 1966
when he organized an exhibition 'Systemic Painting' at the Solomon R.
Guggenheim Museum, New York, to refer to a type of abstract art
characterized by the use of very simple standardized forms, usually geometric
in character, either in a single concentrated image or repeated in a system
arranged according to a clearly visible principle of organization. The
Chevron paintings of Noland are examples of Systemic art. It has been
described as a branch of Minimal art, but Alloway extended the term to cover
Colour Field painting." "[23]
9.6 Isn’t generative art about the issue of authorship?
Certainly when one turns the creation of a work of art over to a machine, and part of
the work is created without the participation of human intuition, some will see a
resonance with contemporary post-structural thinking. Some generative artists work
specifically in the vein of problematizing traditional notions about authorship. But
the generative approach has no particular content bias, and generative artists are free
to explore life, death, love, war, beauty, or any other theme.
9.7 Was Jackson Pollock a generative artist?
Partially because Jackson Pollock’s best-known work seems “random”, and partially
because his “drip and splash” technique seems to be a retreat from conscious artistic
control, many wonder whether Jackson Pollock can be considered a generative artist.
I don’t consider his work to be generative art because there is no autonomous system
involved in the creation of his paintings.
There is, however, an interesting link between Pollock’s most famous work and
complexity theory. Physicist Richard Taylor has shown that Pollock’s drip and
splash marks are fractal in nature, that they are likely the result of Pollock learning
how to “launch” the paint with his wrist and arm so as to induce chaotic fluid flow,
and that as Pollock’s work progressed he was able to achieve higher and higher
degrees of fractal dimension. [24]
Perhaps it is this fractal look that encourages the knowledgeable observer to try to
connect Pollock to generative art. In any case Pollock applied the paint manually
without the use of any external system. The work was a hard earned intuitive creation
requiring physical discipline, and requiring many sessions and constant reworking.
However, the fact that his manual practice rests on underlying physics that happens to
engage contemporary notions of fractals and chaos theory shouldn’t sway one to think
of these paintings as generative works. All artwork has underlying physics, and if
that were the measure then all art would have to be called generative art.

9.8 Is Hans Haacke a generative artist?
Han’s Haacke is a prescient artist whose work critiques both physical and social
systems in a bold way that precedes by decades the similar attempts now underway in
complexity science. It is important, however, to differentiate between works that are
about systems and works that use systems in their creation. Haacke has produced
both.
As curators for the exhibit “COMPLEXITY – Art and Complex Systems” Ellen K.
Levy and I were thrilled to be able to present Haacke’s 1963 piece “Condensation
Cube”. A simple acrylic cube with a bit of water at the bottom and sealed shut,
“Condensation Cube” becomes a miniature weather system as an ever changing
display of condensation forms on the cube’s walls. This work anticipated
meteorologist Ralph Lorenz’s discovery of chaotic strange attractors, and stands as a
wonderful example of generative art. [25]
The following artists statement written by Haacke in 1965 could stand today as a
manifesto for generative artists exploring complex adaptive systems.
HANS HAACKE Statement
...make something which experiences, reacts to its environment, changes, is nonstable...
...make something indeterminate, which always looks different, the shape of which
cannot be predicted precisely...
...make something which cannot 'perform' without the assistance of its environment...
...make something which reacts to light and temperature changes, is subject to air
currents and depends, in its functioning, on the forces of gravity...
...make something which the 'spectator' handles, with which he plays and thus
animates...
...make something which lives in time and makes the 'spectator' experience time...
...articulate: something natural...

Cologne, January 1965 [26]
9.9 Is Sol Lewitt a generative artist?
Most of Sol Lewitt’s work is generative, and as a conceptual artist much of his
attention is focused on exploring systems for their own intrinsic value. In his
“Paragraphs on Conceptual Art” from 1967 he says, “The idea becomes a machine
that makes the art” and refers to the actual construction of the work as “a perfunctory

affair”. His combinatorial drawings and sculptures demonstrate the continuing
viability of highly ordered systems in generative art.
9.10 Shouldn’t all generative art exhibit constant change and
unforeseeable results?
There is much to be said for the creation of complex systems as installation art that
exhibits dynamics in real time for an audience. It is a wonderful way for an artist to
share his explorations of complex systems, and especially complex adaptive systems,
with an audience. However, an art practice that uses a dynamic complex system to
create what is ultimately a static object or recording is still generative art. As is, for
that matter, works resulting from the use of simple generative methods.
9.11 Is generative art modern or post-modern?
Generative art is ideologically neutral. It is simply a way of creating art and any
content considerations are up to the given artist. And besides, generative art
historically precedes modernism, post-modernism, and just about any other “ism” on
record.
Certainly one can make generative art that exhibits a postmodern attitude. Many do.
But one can also make generative art that attempts to refute post-modernism.
Two of the most significant impacts of post-modernism on art are (1) the proposed
abandonment of formalism and beauty as a meaningful area of exploration, and (2)
the proposed abandonment of the notion that art can reveal truth in any nonrelativistic way. Form, beauty, and knowledge are held to be mere social
constructions.
Generative art can be used to attack these fundamental points head on. First,
generative artists can explore form as something other than arbitrary social
convention. Using complex systems artists can create form that emerges as the result
of naturally occurring processes beyond the influence of culture and man.
Second, having done this, generative artists can demonstrate by compelling example
reasons to maintain faith in our ability to understand our world. The generative artist
can remind us that the universe itself is a generative system. And through generative
art we can regain our sense of place and participation in that universe.

References
[1] Galanter, P. Foundations of generative art systems – a hybrid survey and studio
class for graduate students. Generative Art 2001: Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference. Generative Design Lab, Milan Polytechnic, Milan 2001
[2] Schwanauer, S. M. and D. A. Levitt (1993). Machine models of music .
Cambridge, Mass., MIT Press.
[3] Miller, Dennis, Game of Chance, Electronic Musician, p 53-64, November 2003
[4] Perlin, Ken. An Image Synthesizer, Proc. SIGGRAPH '85, ACM Computer
Graphics, Vol.19, No.3, pp.287-296.
[5] Prusinkiewicz, P., A. Lindenmayer, et al. (1990). The algorithmic beauty of plants
. New York, Springer-Verlag.
[6] Todd, S., Latham, W. (1992) Evolutionary art and computers. London, Academic
Press Limited
[7] Carrol, Noel. (1999) Philosophy of Art, London, Routledge
[8] Casti, John L. (1994) Complexification, New York, HarperCollins
[9] Shannon, Claude E. A mathematical theory of communication. The Bell System
Technical Journal, 27(3):379--423, 1948.
[10] Moles, A. A. (1966). Information theory and esthetic perception. Urbana,
University of Illinois Press.
[11] Bar-Yam, Y. (1997). Dynamics of complex systems. Reading, Mass., AddisonWesley.
[12] Gell-Mann, Murry. What is complexity? Complexity – John Whiley and Sons,
Vol 1 No 1, 1995
[13] Flake, G. W. (1998) The computational beauty of nature, Cambridge, The MIT
Press
[14] Hargittai, I., Hargittai, M. (1994) Symmetry: a unifying concept, Bolinas CA,
Shelter Publications
[15] Stevens, P. S. (1981). Handbook of regular patterns: an introduction to symmetry
in two dimensions. Cambridge, Mass., MIT Press.
[16] Locher, J. L., ed. (1992) M. C. Escher: His life and complete graphic work, New
York, Abradale Press

[17] Alberro, A. and B. Stimson, ed. (1999). Conceptual art: a critical anthology.
Cambridge, Mass., MIT Press.
[18] Meyer, J. (2000) Minimalism: themes and movements. London, Phaidon
[19] Balter, Michael. Oldest Art – From a Modern Human’s Brow - or Doodling.
Science, Vol. 295 pp 247-249
[20] Bois, Y. A., J. Cowart, et al. (1992). Ellsworth Kelly: the years in France, 19481954 . Washington, D.C. [München], National Gallery of Art; Prestel-Verlag.
[21] Sobieszek, R. A. and W. S. Burroughs (1996). Ports of entry: William S.
Burroughs and the arts . Los Angeles New York, Los Angeles County Museum of Art
; Distributed in the USA by Thames and Hudson.
[22] McCorduck, P. (1991). Aaron's code: meta-art, artificial intelligence, and the
work of Harold Cohen . New York, W.H. Freeman
[23] Osborne, Harold, ed. (1988) The Oxford Companion to Twentieth-Century Art.
Oxford, Oxford University Press
[24] Taylor, R., Micolich, A., Jones, D. The constructtion of Jackson Pollock’s
fractal drip paintings. Leonardo, Vol 35, No. 2, pp. 203-207
[25] Benthall, J. (1972). Science and technology in art today. New York,, Praeger
[26] Cotter, S., Douglas, C. ed. (2000) Force fields: phases of the kinetic. Barcelona,
Museu d’Art Contemporani de Barcelona
[27] This section is based on text I wrote with Ellen K. Levy in preparation for the
exhibit we co-curated “COMPLEXITY / Art and Complex Systems”. This exhibit
opened at the Dorsky Museum at SUNY New Paltz in the fall of 2002.

