A new business venture is on the horizon.
Patience is a key to joy.
Follow your bliss and the Universe will open doors where there were once only walls.
A big fortune will descend upon you this year.
Do not think that me or my brothers have supreme control over what will happen to you.
You will kiss your crush ohhh lalahh
Your father still loves and is in always with you. Remember that.
stop nagging to your partner and take it day by day.
You're true love will show himself to you under the moonlight.
You are what you are; understand yourself before you react
You will soon be honored by someone you respect.
In music, one must think with his heart and feel with his brain.
You are a person with a good sense of justice, now it's time to act like it.
Follow your bliss and the Universe will open doors where there were once only walls.
Your present question marks are going to succeed.
Poverty is no disgrace.
True wisdom is found in happiness.
It is much easier to look for the bad, than it is to find the good
It's a good thing that life is not as serious as it seems to the waiter
Stop searching forever, happiness is just next to you.
In God we trust.
The harder you try to not be like your parents, the more likely you will become them
Rivers need springs.
It's up to you to clearify.
Your dearest dream is coming true. God looks after you especially.
The best is yet to come.
The best is yet to come.
The harder you try to not be like your parents, the more likely you will become them
Before you can be reborn you must die.
Rarely do great beauty and great virtue dwell together as they do in you.
Good news from afar may bring you a welcome visitor.
Follow your bliss and the Universe will open doors where there were once only walls.
You will recieve some high prize or award.
In evrything there is a piece of truth.But a piece.
Bend the rod while it is still hot.
Let's finish this up now, someone is waiting for you on that
Digital circuits are made from analog parts.
Enjoyed the meal? Buy one to go too.
Do not worry, you will have great peace.
Do not judge a book by it's color.
Love is free. Lust will cost you everything you have.
Never underestimate the power of the human touch.
Do not seek so much to find the answer as much as to understand the question better.
They say you are stubborn; you call it persistence.
Do not be covered in sadness or be fooled in happiness they both must exist
If you never give up on love, It will never give up on you.
Do what is right, not what you should.
The most useless energy is trying to change what and who God so carefully created.
It's Never Too Late For Good Things To Happen!
If u love someone keep fighting for them
The world may be your oyster, but that doesn't mean you'll get it's pearl.
You will be rewarded for being a good listener in the next week.
Let your fantasies unwind...
Your wish will come true.
Emotion is energy in motion.
If a person who has caused you pain and suffering has brought you, reconsider that person's value in your life
A dream you have will come true
Your happiness is intertwined with your outlook on life.
If you feel you are right, stand firmly by your convictions.
A bargain is something you don't need at a price you can't resist.
Your problem just got bigger. Think, what have you done.
Punctuality is the politeness of kings and the duty of gentle people everywhere.
Two small jumps are sometimes better than one big leap.
All the water in the world can't sink a ship unless it gets inside.
You are often asked if it is in yet.
Simplicity and clearity should be the theme in your dress.
The worst of friends may become the best of enemies, but you will always find yourself hanging on.
Someday everything will all make perfect sense
Movies have pause buttons, friends do not
Bread today is better than cake tomorrow.
You will soon discover a major truth about the one you love most.
You are admired by everyone for your talent and ability.
Determination is the wake-up call to the human will.
You will soon emerge victorious from the maze you've been traveling in.
See if you can learn anything from the children.
Jealousy is a useless emotion.
All the water in the world can't sink a ship unless it gets inside.
Ones always regrets what could have done. Remember for next time.
A bird in the hand is worth three in the bush!!
If you speak honestly, everyone will listen.
Love Conquers all.
If you don t give something, you will  not get anything
Bread today is better than cake tomorrow.
Think you can. Think you can't. Either way, you'll be right.
