Only I can change my life. No one can do it for me.
Life is 10% what happens to you and 90% how you react to it.
Good, better, best. Never let it rest. 'Til your good is better and your better is best.
Optimism is the faith that leads to achievement. Nothing can be done without hope and confidence.
It does not matter how slowly you go as long as you do not stop.
With the new day comes new strength and new thoughts.
In order to succeed, we must first believe that we can.
Infuse your life with action. Don't wait for it to happen. Make it happen. Make your own future. Make your own hope. Make your own love. And whatever your beliefs, honor your creator, not by passively waiting for grace to come down from upon high, but by doing what you can to make grace happen... yourself, right now, right down here on Earth.
Failure will never overtake me if my determination to succeed is strong enough.
Always do your best. What you plant now, you will harvest later.
The secret of getting ahead is getting started.
It always seems impossible until it's done.
Don't think, just do.
If you can dream it, you can do it.
The past cannot be changed. The future is yet in your power.
A creative man is motivated by the desire to achieve, not by the desire to beat others.
What you do today can improve all your tomorrows.
Our greatest weakness lies in giving up. The most certain way to succeed is always to try just one more time.
Keep your eyes on the stars, and your feet on the ground.
Problems are not stop signs, they are guidelines.
Believe in yourself! Have faith in your abilities! Without a humble but reasonable confidence in your own powers you cannot be successful or happy.
Setting goals is the first step in turning the invisible into the visible.
Start where you are. Use what you have. Do what you can.
Your talent is God's gift to you. What you do with it is your gift back to God.
If you're going through hell, keep going.
You can't cross the sea merely by standing and staring at the water.
What makes a boy a “man” and a girl a “woman”? Courage and the willingness to keep going when life gets hard.
Life is a stage. Don’t play the victim role.
Ask your future self if you should quit or keep going. What’s their answer?
Once you learn to quit, it becomes a habit.
One blink at a time.
One breath at a time.
One heartbeat at a time.
One step at a time.
One day at a time.
Keep going…
Challenges and obstacles are a part of life. They make us stronger and build character. If life were easy it would be boring and you would never grow.
I don’t care how long it takes me, but I’m going somewhere beautiful.
Keep going. Everything you need will come to you at the perfect time.
Maybe it won’t work out. But maybe seeing if it does will be the best adventure ever.
Trust the process.
Life can be a scary but fun rollercoaster ride: filled with ups and downs, twist and turns, and you might get dizzy or throw up. But in the end, you will always return safe and sound.
Stop whining.
Stop crying.
Stop thinking “poor me”.
It’s time to put on your big boy pants and man up!
Remember that guy that gave up? Neither does anyone else.
Good things come to those who believe. Better things come to those who are patient. The best things come to those who never give up.
At the end of the day, you can either focus on what’s tearing you apart, or you can focus on what’s keeping you together.
Your hardest times often lead to the greatest moments of your life. Keep going. Tough situations build strong people in the end.
It does not matter how slowly you go as long as you do not stop.
Life is tough, my darling, but so are you.
I have learned a lot this year… I learned that things don’t always turn out the way you planned, or the way you think they should. And I’ve learned that there are things that go wrong that don’t always get fixed or get put back together the way they were before. I’ve learned that some broken things stay broken, and I’ve learned that you can get through bad times and keep looking for better ones, as long as you have people who love you.
Every time you get upset at something, ask yourself if you were to die tomorrow, was it worth wasting your time being angry?
It’s not about perfect. It’s about effort. And when you implement that effort into your life… every single day, that’s where transformation happens. That’s how change occurs. Keep going, remember why you started.
Never stop trying. Never stop believing. Never give up. Your day will come.
Fall seven times, stand up eight.
If you get tired, learn to rest, not quit.
Like the morning sun, you too shall rise and continue to shine.
Most of the important things in the world have been accomplished by people who have kept on trying when there seemed to be no hope at all.
Life is like a car. If you keep going in reverse, you won’t get to your destination, but if you speed up and don’t take the time to enjoy your surroundings, you might get lost.
I will breathe. I will think of solutions. I will not let my worry control me. I will simply breathe. And it will be okay. Because I don’t quit.
Make time for it. Just get it done. Nobody ever got strong or got in shape by thinking about it. They did it.
Just keep going. No feeling is final.
Determination gives you the resolve to keep going in spite of the roadblocks that lay before you.
You should never give up. No matter how hard the situation is, always believe that something beautiful is going to happen.
When obstacles arise, you change your direction to reach your goal, you do not change your decision to get there.
Never give up trying to do what you really want to do. Where there is love and inspiration, you cannot go wrong.
Things don’t go wrong and break your heart so you can become bitter and give up. They happen to break you down and build you up so you can be all that you were intended to be.
Focus on your goal. Don’t look in any direction but ahead.
Success is the ability to go from one failure to another with no loss of enthusiasm.
I will persist until I succeed. Always will I take another step. If that is of no avail I will take another, and yet another. In truth, one step at a time is not too difficult. I know that small attempts, repeated, will complete any undertaking. – Og Mandino
If you feel like giving up, just look back on how far you are already.
Strength doesn’t come from what you can do. It comes from overcoming the things you once thought you couldn’t.
If you can’t stop thinking about it, don’t stop working for it.
I didn’t come this far to only come this far.
Don’t think about what can happen in a month. Don’t think about what can happen in a year. Just focus on the 24 hours in front of you and do what you can to get closer to where you want to be.
I can and I will. Watch me.
Don’t stop until you’re proud.
Keep going. No matter what you do, no matter how many times you screw up and think to yourself “there’s no point to carry on”, no matter how many people tell you that you can’t do it – keep going. Don’t quit. Don’t quit, because a month from now you will be that much closer to your goal than you are now. Yesterday you said tomorrow. Make today count.
As long as you feel pain, you’re still alive. As long as you make mistakes, you’re still human. And as long as you keep trying, there’s still hope. Never give up on yourself and never abandon your dreams.
The one who falls and gets up is so much stronger than the one who never fell.
If you’re going through hell, keep going.
Keep going when you feel scared because: You’re on the right track! You’re too close to success! You’ll regret if you quit!
There are only two mistakes one can make along the road to truth; not going all the way, and not starting.
Be thankful for what you are now, and keep fighting for what you want to be tomorrow.
If you stumble, make it part of the dance.
You are what you do, not what you say you’ll do.
I learned to keep going, even in bad times. I learned not to despair, even when you world was falling apart.
Sometimes the bravest thing you can do is to keep going when you really feel like giving up.
Hope is what keeps us going in life, we hope we will be strong, we hope we will pass a test, we hope we will make new friends, we hope we will never lose the old, we hope someone loves us, we hope that love will find us, we hope when all seems lost, we hope when we are hurt and we hope when we cry. Never lose your hope, never give up when someone gives up on you, they may still hope as you do.
Anxiety happens when you think you have to figure out everything all at once. Breathe. You’re strong. You got this. Take it day by day.
It always seems impossible until it’s done.
One day I’ll be at the place I always wanted to be.
Great works are performed, not by strength, but by perseverance.
Our greatest glory is not in never failing, but in rising every time we fall.
Perseverance is the hard work you do after you get tired of doing the hard work you already did.
There is a difference between giving up and knowing when you’ve had enough.
God has a purpose for your pain, a reason for your struggle and a gift for your faithfulness. Don’t give up!
It’s never too late and you’re never too old to become better
One of the happiest moments ever, is when you find the courage to let go of what you can’t change.
Decide carefully, exactly what you want in life, then work like mad to make sure you get it!
The comeback is always stronger than the setback.
Disappointments are just God’s way of saying: I’ve got something better in store.
You are stronger than you think.
Strength grows in the moments when you think you can’t go on but you keep going anyway.
Victory is always possible for the person who refuses to stop fighting.
I want to inspire people. I want someone to look at me and say “because of you, I didn’t give up.”
Success seems to be connected with action, Successful people keep moving. They make mistakes, but they don’t quit.
In life, many things don’t go according to plan. If you fall, get back up. If you stumble, regain your balance. Never give up.
Pain is temporary. Quitting lasts forever.
Champions keep playing until they get it right.
In three words I can sum up everything I’ve learned about life: it goes on.
Don’t ever give up. Don’t ever give in. Don’t ever stop trying. Don’t ever sell out. And if you find yourself succumbing to one of the above for a brief moment, pick yourself up, brush yourself off, whisper a prayer, and start where you left off. But never, ever, ever give up.
Success . . . seems to be connected with action. Successful men keep moving. They make mistakes, but they don’t quit.
Forget about the past. It does not exist, except in your memory. Drop it. And stop worrying about how you’re going to get through tomorrow. Life is going on right here, right now – pay attention to that and all will be well.
Even if I knew that tomorrow the world would go to pieces, I would still plant my apple tree.
Life can go up. Life can go down. Things happen… And on the bad, down days, you wonder if you will find the strength to overcome the setbacks in your life. The disappointment can be crushing, but this is not the end of your story. There is more for you and I hope that reading through these quotes will give you the strength to choose to never give up.
Never give up on something you really want. It’s difficult to wait, but it’s more difficult to regret.
The harder the struggle, the more glorious the triumph.
Don’t let today’s troubles bring you down. Don’t let life’s little obstacles keep you from trying. Don’t let your fears keep you from dreaming. Don’t give up for any reason. Believe in yourself.
Courage doesn’t always roar. Sometimes courage is the little voice at the end of the day that says I’ll try again tomorrow.
We all make mistakes, but the winner knows that success comes from perseverance: trying, failing, learning, and doing it again until he succeeds.
