Only I can change my life. No one can do it for me.
Life is 10% what happens to you and 90% how you react to it.
Good, better, best. Never let it rest. 'Til your good is better and your better is best.
Optimism is the faith that leads to achievement. Nothing can be done without hope and confidence.
It does not matter how slowly you go as long as you do not stop.
With the new day comes new strength and new thoughts.
In order to succeed, we must first believe that we can.
Infuse your life with action. Don't wait for it to happen. Make it happen. Make your own future. Make your own hope. Make your own love. And whatever your beliefs, honor your creator, not by passively waiting for grace to come down from upon high, but by doing what you can to make grace happen... yourself, right now, right down here on Earth.
Failure will never overtake me if my determination to succeed is strong enough.
Always do your best. What you plant now, you will harvest later.
The secret of getting ahead is getting started.
It always seems impossible until it's done.
Don't think, just do.
If you can dream it, you can do it.
The past cannot be changed. The future is yet in your power.
A creative man is motivated by the desire to achieve, not by the desire to beat others.
What you do today can improve all your tomorrows.
Our greatest weakness lies in giving up. The most certain way to succeed is always to try just one more time.
Keep your eyes on the stars, and your feet on the ground.
Problems are not stop signs, they are guidelines.
Believe in yourself! Have faith in your abilities! Without a humble but reasonable confidence in your own powers you cannot be successful or happy.
Setting goals is the first step in turning the invisible into the visible.
Start where you are. Use what you have. Do what you can.
Your talent is God's gift to you. What you do with it is your gift back to God.
If you're going through hell, keep going.
You can't cross the sea merely by standing and staring at the water.
